There are some people who believe
that the definition
of story and plot are different.
Martin Scorsese defines
story and plot differently.
The story for him
is the story itself.
The king married
the queen and had a child.
The child grew up
and saw the spinning wheel.
She pricked herself
and then fell asleep.
That’s the story.
While the plot
includes the motivation
of all the characters,
wherein
the spinning wheel is cursed,
and how the king hid
the spinning wheel
from his innocent child.
That’s part of the plot
because that's the reason
behind the character’s actions.
So while the story is flowing,
the plot is also moving forward.
That’s a different definition,
but valid all the same.
For me, it’s important
that you can separate it,
balance it out
especially if it’s purely plot—
thoughts, motivations of the character.
It’s got something to do
with what I said in the previous sessions.
The plot deepens
when the character ponders.
And if the character
is actually doing something.
- Isn’t there something
like the first act ends
when the character
resolves the conflict
and then the second act is--
You introduce another?
or has the effect of resolving gradually?
If it’s conventional, yes.
But it's not necessary
to resolve it.
It might cause more tension.
The implication
from the decision
might create bigger
or heavier problems.
For example,
in the first act.
Let’s say Macbeth kills the king.
In the next act
Macbeth becomes king.
This causes more complications
because he wants to reign
the kingdom until he has a child.
After that, he kills those
he perceives as threats
until he ends up
killing so many people.
That's already set
and things just worsen.
'Til there's nowhere
to go in the end.
It could be something like that,
that’s the most conventional.
We also have something called--
Especially in cinema, we also have
the three-act structure of screenwriting.
When the first act is done,
the problem
should have been introduced.
Somewhere in the second act,
you create false hope.
The problem seems solved,
when it actually isn't
and underneath it
is a bigger problem
which will be towards
the end of the second act
where you think
the character is losing.
And then the third act comes,
where she has a realization,
which is the real victory.
Or Rocky could lose,
but he’s still a winner inside.
Something like that.
Although that’s conventional,
this play could be something different.
I’m not sure
when the division of acts began.
Its definition is--
But the set definition of this is,
like what I said,
it creates a dramatic curve.
If something wasn’t resolved
and caused a huge incident instead,
it could be made into several scenes.
And then the next act
could start again with,
let's say we're at the rising action,
the king died,
what will happen
after the king dies?
The one who knows
Macbeth’s secret is killed.
Afterwards,
he ordered to kill
the threats to his throne
just so he could remain as king.
He did not only kill the king,
but wanted to kill the king’s children as well.
Something like that.
The problem gets
bigger and bigger.
That's what sets
when the act ends.
In fact, I think Shakespeare’s plays
are not written in acts
a lot of that was done
by scholars, directors.
They collectively agreed
that this scene will end in that act.
Because if you look
at Macbeth’s script,
if you remove the act breaks,
It’s continuous,
just one scene after another.
There're a lot of scenes.
Sometimes, it’s too short
that it doesn't even fill a page.
"When shall we meet again?"
"In thunder, lighting, or in rain?"
"Macbeth!"
"Go, go, to."
It's done.
The next act follows.
It's Macbeth's turn.
Sometimes it’s too long.
It's similar to Brecht's scenes.
He didn't use act breaks.
The concept of acts
became more important.
Especially during
the Enligtenment period,
when the concept of unity of time,
space, and action was introduced.
Watching an act
is like catching
the characters in a scene
at a particular time until it ends.
There’s an illusion of real time.
It’s what we call
the fourth wall, right?
As if the audience
is peeking at the door
just when someone
who’s about to get married comes in.
they watch 'til the end
'til the characters split up.
But only until that scene.
If you add a new complication,
a second act will appear.
If you add another one,
a third act or up to five acts—
Five acts is the most number
of acts as far as I know.
Chekhov is the master of that.
One scene,
one event,
one act.
And then what comes
after the scene is an act again.
Now, there's a...
you need some
discipline in doing this
because you have to select
the dramatic elements
you can include and integrate,
while still moving
the story forward.
There’s a little bit
of realism there.
I think it’s the same with Ibsen.
He divides his acts,
especially the ones with realism.
Compared to, for example,
his earlier play “Peer Gynt’”
There were so many scenes
and the character
went to so many places.
There were so many scenes
It was confusing
and there were so many characters.
Does Neil Simon
have something like that?
Like per act?
- Per time, place.
It requires a particular discipline
to write in that way.
It's not that easy.
First,
before you start,
you have to create
and choose a point of attack.
When's the best part
to start a story?
You’re already at the high point
and then there’s a lady
screaming in the background.
So that when it starts,
you introduce the conflict right away.
Let’s say you start
with a maid opening the curtain.
That’s a pretty corny device.
The maid is opening the curtain
until another maid comes,
“Hey! Do you know
what happened last night?"
"Yeah. The guy did this
and this and this.”
Minor characters
introducing the main character
and then the
main character appears.
Well, at least,
he will be saved from explaining
the conflict.
The gossipers are there
to explain what’s happening
to the audience.
Those are some realistic devices
that any writer can use.
Of course, since it’s been used often,
it’s become cliché.
In a musical,
it begins with a song.
♫♪ Good morning to this town,
this beautiful, beautiful town ♪♫
Isn’t that like
Beauty and the Beast?
There are times
when it already becomes a standard.
and the second song
for any musical will have to be...
the wish,
the dream of the character.
For Little Mermaid,
it’s “Part of That World.”
Beauty and the Beast is the same.
So that’s how
they do certain standards.
But the writer can also break
the standards at his own risk.
So that’s how...
we divide scenes.
You don’t have
to resort to doing
a play divided by acts.
There are a huge number of playwrights
who do not follow the act division.
In the theater industry,
the reason why
it’s called an act is because
the director decides
when the intermission takes place.
The director dictates,
“Okay, we’ll have the intermission here”
So the the first act
can be before the intermission.
The second act
is after the intermission
in the eyes of the audience
and the production crew.
Notice that when you purchase a script,
the act division is different
or there isn’t an act division at all,
but just a division of scenes.
Or there’s just one scene
and then the character
just keeps on narrating
while the setting changes
from time to time.
For example,
I could think of
Mark Haddon’s
“The Curious Incident of the Dog...”
What's it again?
Curious incident
of a dog killed somewhere.
That.
When you read the play,
the division of scenes
isn't that demarcated.
because I think
it was improvised.
While the character travelled to London,
there are choruses that enumerate
the different products or things he sees,
Ttrying to get into the consciousness
of the character who is autistic
or seemingly special.
There're a lot of devices
that can be used in theater.
I think that’s theater’s advantage.
Even over cinema
which at this point
is heavily biased
on realism.
That’s why when you translate
a lot of theatrical devices into cinema,
it either throws you off
or it doesn’t work.
When we go
inside the moviehouse,
somehow we have some
assumptions and expectations
that the logic in cinema
will have to be realistic.
Whether it’s a Marvel superhero
or a Star Wars character,
it has to be logical.
I don’t know why it’s like that.
Meanwhile, cinema
started out from fantasy, right?
“The Cabinet of Doctor Caligari”
It's so different.
In fact, that was very expressionistic.
In theater, there are so many
devices that you can use,
melding realism
and fantasy together.
Why do people
suddenly burst into song?
That’s why it’s so surprising
if you’re not used
to watching it on film.
“Why are they singing?"
"What is that?”
It takes a while to get used to it, right?
Something like that.
But in theater, when the character sings,
you think, “That’s natural!”
You’re not bothered or anything.
And you’re aware of the artifice,
But when you place
the artifice in cinema,
it takes a while
for you to get used to it.
- Is it the same with Filipino plays
or works written by Filipinos?
What is?
- Common?
- What’s common?
No! The history of Philippine
contemporary theater is really varied.
It's really varied.
There are...
I guess in Virgin Labfest
the tendency is what’s feasible for a one act.
Something like that.
But in the history of Philippine
contemporary theater,
it’s varied.
Especially in traditional theater.
It’s really not divided into acts.
Sometimes
the duration of a play
can last for a whole day.
Senakulo is what?
One week.
You start with Genesis
and end with Assumption
or even reach
the Final Judgement
if you're enthusiastic.
In traditional theatre
is so much more complex--
they would even add
things not from the bible.
Contemporary theater
utilizes a lot of other sources.
It's not that–
Realism of course
has its own timeline.
A semblance of realism
happened when the sarsuwela came in.
And to think that sarsuwela
is still song and...
In sarswela,
that’s when they started,
talking about people,
and not about Romans, Jews,
Jesus Christ or the Albanians
and the middle ages.
It’s about the ordinary Filipino
who do cockfights and such, right?
That’s how it started, I guess,
when Filipinos could reflect
“Ah, I can relate to that
with regards to my ordinary life.”
Something like that.
I want you to create a scenario.
What’s a scenario?
It's the actual play itself
that you're seeing.
It's not just the story.
but the play that you visualize
being mounted on stage.
You’re now describing the scenes
of your play.
If it’s a one-scene play,
you’re describing...
what is happening
from the beginning of the scene
until the end of it.
If it’s one-act,
then that’s it.
Whatever the flow,
when a mother enters
and sees her child staring
at a plate full of bacon and eggs,
the mother would ask the child,
the child doesn’t answer.
The mother panics.
“What’s happening?
Is she sick again?”
“Did she take the medicine?”
You can describe that
not necessarily in dialogue form
You’re describing the scene
so that it will be clearer to you
when you’ll have to include
various information on the story
along the way.
What will trigger the introduction
of complications in the story?
Scene one, what is happening?
It’s like you’re describing
what you’re seeing on stage
when the play you’re writing is shown.
From the beginning to the end.
It’s not the chronology of the story,
it’s the chronology of the play.
What happens next?
What do you want
the audience to see
at what point?
This is where the control comes
in in terms of revealing
parts of the story.
Especially if you’re interested
in creating reveals or the punch or the twist.
If you don’t develop
the twist right,
then it sucks.
This is because
you didn’t lay it out right.
The scenario can help you do that.
And you can revise the scenario
in the course of writing it
before
you embark on writing
the draft.
This is also what
tells you or what validates
the quality of your character.
Even without the dialogue
we realize what kind
of character you have
because of what she does.
That’s also another
important reason in making scenarios
because sometimes
you become forced
to create situations
where your character can show
her personality without verbalizing it.
I want you to make a scenario.
It’s just simple.
You just have to describe
the first scene,
where it took place,
the characters in that scene,
and what they are doing.
Just a short description.
After that is the next scene.
If this is a musical,
will there be a song?
By this time,
if you're done with the storyline
you've already chosen
a genre and style.
If it’s a musical,
in the scenario,
you've already plotted
when the characters perform.
When do the big
production numbers happen?
Will they be dancing
on the beach?
You’ve already planned
if they’ll be talking or not.
But, you’re describing
a scene that people
are already watching.
Again, you're becoming
more aware, as a writer.
That what you’re writing
should be performable,
perceptively performable.
She's not just sitting
and thinking about a lot of things.
No, you should bring it out.
But if she's thinking,
other characters could
dramatize what she's thinking.
That can be your writing style.
of your chosen story.
Nevertheless, this is the scenario.
Like what I said
on the previous sessions,
you get to decide
whether to make this a one-act
because your ideas are limited
or you can have a number of scenes.
Or you could divide those into acts.
Each act is usually comprised
of a huge event
that will pave the way
for a bigger complication
to create another act.
Usually, a conventional piece
reaches up to 5 acts.
For example, Shakespeare usually has five acts.
Sometimes, Chekhov has four acts.
So, in creating a scenario,
you should consider the length.
You should be
thinking about it now.
And this is your way
of organizing things.
How will you insert the information
that the friend of your enemy
is actually your child?
When will you put the information
that someone lied to their partners?
When will you insert this part?
This is where you organize it
because this is where you will see
the scenes,
especially if your play is long.
I do it too.
I create a scenario if the play is long.
If it's a one-act play,
it depends on the duration.
But if the play
reaches full length,
outlining is another way
of writing a scenario.
It’s possible that I don't remember
things that I already wrote
so I might end up
writing them back again.
It’s better to write it so
you can see what's going on.
But, there are also
a number of applications,
if you’re familiar with computers,
where you’re allowed
to drag the scenes freely,
and just point-and-click
if you want to revise things.
That is included in creating
the structure of the play.
That is what you have to do.
Write a scenario.
Usually, a scenario would
probably be about 5 to 6 pages,
4 to 5, 4 to 6 pages,
because it is just a description.
You're only narrating.
Character A talked to Character B.
And they talked about this.
So, this has no dialogue yet.
This is one step before
you actually venture in
writing the first draft.
Good luck!